---
layout: post
title: "Deltas"
date: 2016-05-21
excerpt: "Conflict-free Updates"
tags: [Deltas, EmoDB]
type: [blog]
---

Deltas
======

Create, update and delete documents in the EmoDB System of Record by creating deltas.

Introduction
------------

At the core, every document in the System of Record is stored as a sequence of delta operations. 
An Emo delta is a JSON specification that defines incremental updates to any JSON document. Writers simply append a delta (even for deletes). On every read, the
deltas are evaluated in the order they were written to construct the current version of the document.

EmoDB has no built-in support for document-level locks, but allows for Optimistic Concurrency Control (OCC) for operations such as 
read-modify-write by leveraging conditional deltas. See more in the [Guarantees page](../guarantees). Eventual consistency allows EmoDB to work well across multiple data centers. 
Writers express their intent using "deltas," where deltas always converge to a consistent state.

For example, consider a typical review submission process:

1.  The submits a review.  The system writes with the initial review content by creating delta `t1`:

        {
          "product": "Sceptre 32\" LCD 720p",
          "rating": 5,
          "text": "Very nice TV great picture. Very Very light amazing!",
          "contributor": "zkyle"
        }

2.  In Data Center A, the moderation system modifies the review by marking it approved by writing delta `t2`:

        {
          .., "status": "APPROVED"
        }

3.  In Data Center B, the submission server follows up with new information collected on the thank you page by writing
    delta `t3`:

        {
          .., "facebookId": 387075234674416
        }
{:.workflow}

Initially, a reader in Data Center A may only have two deltas visible: `t1` and `t2`.  They're sorted in time order
and evaluated to produce a moderated review.  The reader merges `t1` and `t2` and sees the following:

        {
          "product": "Sceptre 32\" LCD 720p",
          "rating": 5,
          "text": "Very nice TV great picture. Very Very light amazing!",
          "contributor": "zkyle",
          "status": "APPROVED"
        }

Simultaneously, a reader in Data Center B may only be able to see deltas `t1` and `t3`.  They're also sorted in time
order and evaluated to produce a final object.    The reader merges `t1` and `t3` and sees the following:

        {
          "product": "Sceptre 32\" LCD 720p",
          "rating": 5,
          "text": "Very nice TV great picture. Very Very light amazing!",
          "contributor": "zkyle",
          "facebookId": 387075234674416
        }

It isn't until some time later (usually a few seconds, but if there are network issues between data centers, maybe a
day or two later) that all three deltas get replicated to all data centers.  At that point, any reader will see all
three deltas merged together:

        {
          "product": "Sceptre 32\" LCD 720p",
          "rating": 5,
          "text": "Very nice TV great picture. Very Very light amazing!",
          "contributor": "zkyle",
          "status": "APPROVED",
          "facebookId": 387075234674416
        }

Notice that, in some sense, there is a replication conflict between `t2` and `t3` since both deltas modify the same
object.  But because each delta specifies only the fields it modifies, the deltas merge together cleanly and produce the
desired result.

Also notice that multiple data centers were able to concurrently modify the same review without cross-data center
synchronous communication.

Object Model
------------

The core EmoDB object model is based on JSON.  It uses all the same types as JSON:

*   `null`
*   boolean (`true`, `false`)
*   number (32-bit int, 64-bit long, 64-bit double except `NaN`, `Inf`)
*   string (UTF-8)
*   array (`List<Object>`)
*   object (`Map<String, Object>`)

Dates should be modeled as one of the types above, preferably as ISO 8601 strings (such as with [Joda Time](http://joda-time.sourceforge.net/)
and `org.joda.time.format.ISODateTimeFormat`).  If you're using [Jackson](http://jackson.codehaus.org/), call
`jsonFactory.disable(SerializationConfig.Feature.WRITE_DATES_AS_TIMESTAMPS)` to serialize dates as ISO 8601 strings.

The top-level object in a System of Record document is *always* a JSON object, not one of the other types.  The System
of Record adds several "[intrinsic](https://github.com/bazaarvoice/emodb/blob/master/sor-api/src/main/java/com/bazaarvoice/emodb/sor/api/Intrinsic.java)"
fields to every object:

*   `~id` - The content key of the document in the System of Record.
*   `~table` - The table the document belongs to.
*   `~deleted` - `true` If the document does not exist or has been explicitly deleted, `false` otherwise.
*   `~version` - A data center-specific version number that counts the number of times the document has been updated.
    This monotonically increasing number can be used to tell if a particular version of an object is newer or older
    than another version from the same data center.
*   `~signature` - A 128-bit cryptographic hash of the sequence of time UUIDs of the updates to this object.  You can
    implement a read-modify-write transaction by reading an object then writing back to the object with a conditional
    delta that checks that `~signature` has not changed since the object was read.
*   `~firstUpdateAt` - An ISO 8601-format timestamp string extracted from the time UUID of the first delta written to
    the object.  Note that deleting and re-creating the object does *not* reset the value of `~firstUpdateAt`.  This
    entry will be omitted if the document has never been written to (ie. `~version` is `0`).
*   `~lastUpdateAt` - An ISO 8601-format timestamp string extracted from the time UUID of the last delta written to the
    object.  This entry will be omitted if the document has never been written to (ie. `~version` is `0`).  Note that
    `~lastUpdateAt` is not a reliable way to compare two versions of an object: if data center A writes updates `t1`
    and `t3` and data center B writes update `t2`, a reader in data center A may read one version of the object
    consisting of `[t1, t3]` then later read a second version of the object consisting of `[t1, t2, t3]`.  Both
    versions will have the same `~lastUpdateAt`, but they will have different values of `~version` and `~signature`.
*   `~lastMutateAt` - An ISO 8601-format timestamp string extracted from the time UUID of the last delta written to the
    object which changed the document content (excluding intrinsics).  For example, if the latest delta is
    `{..,"available":true}` and the prior state of the document already contained the value "available" set to `true`
    then the `~lastUpdateAt` would be updated but the `~lastMutateAt` would retain the timestamp from the previous
    delta.  For the same reasons as `~lastUpdateAt` `~lastMutateAt` is also unreliable for comparing object
    versions.  In fact, under the right circumstances replication delays between data centers can actually cause
    the `~lastMutateAt` value to move backwards if the same updates are applied in each data center.
*   Plus all map entries specified in the table template when the System of Record table was created.

The Java System of Record API accepts the following as JSON objects:

*   `null`
*   `java.lang.Boolean`
*   `java.lang.Byte` (will be converted to `Integer`)
*   `java.lang.Short` (will be converted to `Integer`)
*   `java.lang.Integer`
*   `java.lang.Long` (will be converted to `Integer` if between `Integer.MIN_VALUE` and `MAX_VALUE`)
*   `java.lang.Float` (will be converted to `Double`)
*   `java.lang.Double`
*   `java.lang.BigInteger` (will be converted to `Integer`, `Long` or `Double` depending on its scale)
*   `java.lang.String`
*   `java.util.List<?>` (objects in the list must also be valid JSON objects)
*   `java.util.Map<String, ?>` (keys must be non-null strings, values must be valid JSON objects, null values are allowed)

Passing other Java types to methods that except JSON will trigger a `com.bazaarvoice.emodb.sor.delta.JsonValidationException`.
Note that although `java.util.Set` is not considered a valid JSON type it is possible to perform set operations on arrays
using `java.util.List`  More on this [below](#set).

Deltas
------

EmoDB deltas use a recursive, pattern matching approach.  There are delta operations for setting a value, deleting a
value, and updating the value of a key in a map, where the map value update is itself a delta operation.

Note that there are no operations for modifying a list other than completely replacing or deleting it.  It is difficult
to design list update operations that resolve cleanly when there are write conflicts.  However, if you need to
allow multiple actors to concurrently modify a list there are a few alternatives.  If the list is order-agnostic and
doesn't need to track duplicates then it can be modeled as a set.  If a set is a poor representation then you can
model the list using a map.  Entries in a map are always identified deterministically by key, so concurrent attempts to
add, modify or replace by key can usually be designed to resolve cleanly when there are write conflicts.
If you don't have an obvious candidate for the key, a time UUID (see `TimeUUIDs.newUUID()`) is often a good choice
-- they're globally unique and have a good natural sort order
(use `TimeUUIDs.ordering()`, see [TimeUUIDs](https://github.com/bazaarvoice/emodb/blob/master/sor-api/src/main/java/com/bazaarvoice/emodb/sor/uuid/TimeUUIDs.java)).

From Java, create deltas programmatically using the [Deltas](https://github.com/bazaarvoice/emodb/blob/master/sor-api/src/main/java/com/bazaarvoice/emodb/sor/delta/Deltas.java)
class.  The following kinds of deltas are available:

### Literal

Set the value to a specified JSON object, irrespective of the previous value.

When resolving replication conflicts, the literal delta implements strict last-writer-wins.  For example, an ETL process
which copies entire documents from a remote source into EmoDB typically writes each document in one complete delta
as a literal.

A literal delta is sometimes called a "smash" operation.

The delta syntax has been designed so that literal deltas look exactly like their corresponding JSON.

Literal delta examples:

Java

```java
Deltas.literal(ImmutableMap.<String, Object>)of("rating", 5, "text", "Love it!"))
Deltas.literal("APPROVED")
Deltas.literal(null)
Deltas.literal(3.5e10)
```

Delta Syntax

    {"rating": 5, "text": "Love it!"}
    "APPROVED"
    null
    3.5e10

### Delete

Deletes an object or removes a key from a map.

Deleting an object:

Java

```java
Delta.delete()
```
Delta Syntax

    ~

Removing a key from a map:

Java

```java
Delta.mapBuilder().update("status", Deltas.delete()).build()
Delta.mapBuilder().remove("status").build()  // Equivalent
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"status":~}

Once a value has been deleted, it is considered "undefined."  The `is(undefined)` condition (see below) will evaluate
to true.  Deleting the top-level object, however, works differently--see the Object Model section above regarding
intrinsics.

### Map

Adds, removes, updates entries in a map.  Optionally, delete a map if it's empty after other operations are performed.
Besides the literal delta, the map delta is the most commonly used type of delta.

The [MapDeltaBuilder](https://github.com/bazaarvoice/emodb/blob/master/sor-api/src/main/java/com/bazaarvoice/emodb/sor/delta/MapDeltaBuilder.java)
class contains a number of methods.  Only a few are described, here.

Set the `status` field in a map without modifying other fields in the map:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder().put("status", "APPROVED").build()
```
Delta Syntax

    {..,"status":"APPROVED"}

Set the `status` field in a map if it hasn't been set already:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder().putIfAbsent("status", "APPROVED").build()
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"status":if ~ then "APPROVED" end}

Remove the `status` field from a map:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder().remove("status").build()
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"status":~}

Remove the `status` field from a map if it equals `APPROVED`:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder().remove("status", "APPROVED").build()
```
Delta Syntax

    {..,"status":if "APPROVED" then ~ end}

Add a new nested object:

Java

```java
String photoKey = TimeUUIDs.newUUID().toString();
Deltas.mapBuilder()
        .put(photoKey, ImmutableMap.of("url", "http://example.com/1234.jpg")
        .build()
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"82507710-bca6-11e1-87ef-001c42000009":{"url":"http://example.com/1234.jpg"}}

Set the `status` field on a nested object, but don't create the nested object if someone else deleted it:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder()
    .updateIfExists(photoKey, Deltas.mapBuilder().put("status", "APPROVED").build())
    .build()
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"82507710-bca6-11e1-87ef-001c42000009":if + then {..,"status":"APPROVED"} end}


### Set

Adds and removes values in a set.  Optionally, delete a set if it's empty after other operations are performed.  Unlike
maps, sets can only contain literal values, such as numbers, strings, booleans, lists, and maps.  However, it is not
required that a set is homogeneous; a set can contain any combination of unique literals.

Note that JSON does not have a representation for sets.  To work around this EmoDB can operate on arrays as sets by
applying set delta operations to arrays.  Because of this there is no definitive way to determine if an array returned
by EmoDB originated as a array literal or a set.  However, in most cases the writers know whether attributes are arrays
or sets and the readers don't care, so this ambiguity is typically not be a concern.

For example, the following demonstrates how a set created using set deltas is resolved as an array:

Java

```java
Deltas.mapBuilder()
        .update("codes", Deltas.setBuilder().addAll(501, 789).build())
        .build()

// ... resolves to a Java object equivalent to...

ImmutableMap.of("codes", ImmutableList.of(501, 789))
```

Delta Syntax

    {..,"codes":(..,501,789)}

    ... resolves to the JSON string...

    {"codes":[501,789]}

The [SetDeltaBuilder](https://github.com/bazaarvoice/emodb/blob/master/sor-api/src/main/java/com/bazaarvoice/emodb/sor/delta/SetDeltaBuilder.java)
class contains a number of methods.  Only a few are described, here.

Add the value `top10` to a set without modifying other values in the set:

Java

```java
Deltas.setBuilder().add("top10").build()
```

Delta Syntax

    (..,"top10")

Replace any existing value with the set of (`200`, `204`):

Java

```java
Deltas.setBuilder().addAll(200, 204).removeRest().build()
```

Delta Syntax

    (200,204)

Remove the value `top10` from a set without modifying other values in the set:

Java

```java
Deltas.setBuilder().remove("top10").build()
```

Delta Syntax

    (..,~"top10")

### Conditional

Performs a delta conditionally based on whether a condition is still true at the time the delta is evaluated (which,
remember, is every time the object is read).  Conditional deltas are essential for making changes that resolve cleanly
when multiple writers are concurrently updating an object.  One actor can read an object then write an update where the
update is conditioned upon the object being unchanged since the read.

Conditional deltas take the form of `if <condition> then <delta> elif <condition> then <delta> else <delta> end` where
the `elif` and `else` parts are optional and `elif`s may be chained together as long as desired.

See the "Conditions" section below for the available condition tests.

Mark a review as `APPROVED` but only if new content hasn't been submitted since moderation begun (assumes the
submission app sets `submissionTxId` to a random hash every time new updates are submitted by the end user):

Java

```java
Deltas.conditional(
        Conditions.mapBuilder()
                .contains("submissionTxId", "1d67813cd2329e30dbb58aa9d7c901a1")
                .build(),
        Deltas.mapBuilder()
                .put("status", "APPROVED")
                .build())
```

Delta Syntax

    if {..,"submissionTxId":"1d67813cd2329e30dbb58aa9d7c901a1"} then {..,"status":"APPROVED"} end

### Noop

Makes no change.  The noop delta is used internally by the conditional delta and map delta builders.

Java

```java
Deltas.noop()
```

Delta Syntax

    ..

Conditions
----------

Deltas or parts of deltas may be applied conditionally, based on the current state of the JSON document.

Conditional deltas are *not* designed to support arbitrary transformations of JSON documents in the System of Record.
Instead, they are designed to help resolve the most common concurrent write conflict situations.  This keeps the system
simple and reliable.

### Equal

Compare against the current JSON object for equality against a specified JSON literal.  Maps and lists are compared
recursively.  Order of keys is irrelevent for maps.  Order of entries in lists is significant.  Floating point values
must match exactly (ie. Java `Double.equals()`).  Comparisons are null-safe.

Note that this operation is not appropriate for sets since sets are represented as lists and therefore order-dependent.
To compare two sets for equality use `containsOnly` instead.

Java

```java
Conditions.equal(null)
Conditions.equal(5)
Conditions.equal("APPROVED")
Conditions.equal(ImmutableMap.<String,Object>of("rating", 5, "text", "Love it!")
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    null
    5
    "APPROVED"
    {"rating":5,"text":"Love it!"}

### Intrinsic

Compare an intrinsic field such as `~deleted` against a specified JSON literal.  Note that intrinsic values are not
otherwise considered part of the JSON delta object model and other conditional operations will ignore them.

The `~table` intrinsic is often useful in Databus subscription filters.

Java

```java
Conditions.intrinsic(Intrinsic.ID, "abc123")
Conditions.intrinsic(Intrinsic.TABLE, "review:testcustomer")
Conditions.intrinsic(Intrinsic.DELETED, true)
Conditions.intrinsic(Intrinsic.FIRST_UPDATE_AT, "2012-06-22T20:11:53.473Z")
Conditions.intrinsic(Intrinsic.LAST_UPDATE_AT, "2012-06-22T20:12:09.679Z")
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    intrinsic("~id":"abc123")
    intrinsic("~table":"review:testcustomer")
    intrinsic("~deleted":true)
    intrinsic("~firstUpdateAt":"2012-06-22T20:11:53.473Z")
    intrinsic("~lastUpdateAt":"2012-06-22T20:12:09.679Z")

### Is

Performs a type check against the current JSON object.

A deleted object is considered "undefined."  Anything else is considered "defined."

There is no test that distinguishes between integer and floating point numbers.  Because floating point numbers may be
converted implicitly to ints or longs based on whether their formatted JSON representation requires a decimal point,
it's usually not safe to condition any deltas based on integer vs. floating point.

As previously noted sets are represented as arrays in JSON, so testing if an object is a set is done by performing
a list or array check.

Java

```java
Conditions.isUndefined()
Conditions.isDefined()
Conditions.isBoolean()
Conditions.isNumber()
Conditions.isString()
Conditions.isList()
Conditions.isMap()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    is(undefined)
    is(defined)
    is(bool)
    is(num)
    is(string)
    is(array)
    is(object)

Note that the Java API uses Java-centric `isList` and `isMap` names for those tests but the string syntax uses the
JSON-oriented terms `array` and `object`.

### Comparison

Compares a numeric or string field in the current JSON to a constant value.  There are four options for comparison:
greater than ("gt"), greater than or equal ("ge"), less than ("lt") and less than or equal ("le").

Java

```java
Conditions.gt(5)
Conditions.ge(98.6)
Conditions.lt("2014-01-28T11:21:41.058Z")
Conditions.le(50)
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    gt(5)
    ge(98.6)
    lt("2014-01-28T11:21:41.058Z")
    le(50)

Note that all four variations will evaluate to false if any of the following conditions are true:

1. The current JSON object's value is not defined.
2. The current JSON object's value is null.
3. The current JSON object's value is a string and the constant is numeric, or vice versa.
4. The current JSON object's value is not one of the supported types (for example, a JSON object or array).

### Contains

Tests whether a list or set contains one or more values.  Always returns false if the current JSON object is neither a
list nor a set.  There are three variations on containment testing: "any" returns true if the object contains at
least one value, "all" returns true if the object contains all values, and "only" returns true if the
object contains exactly all values with no additional values.  `contains(value)` is a shortcut for
`containsAll(value)`.

Java

```java
Conditions.contains(18)
Conditions.containsAll("faster", "cheaper")
Conditions.containsAny("med", "large", "x-large")
Conditions.containsOnly("short", "sweet")
````

Delta Condition Syntax

    contains(18)
    containsAll("faster","cheaper")
    containsAny("med","large","x-large")
    containsOnly("short","sweet")

### Like

Performs a wildcard string check against the current JSON object.  If the object is not a String then the
result is always false.

Java

```java
Conditions.like("review:*")         // Would match "review:testclient"
Conditions.like("*:testclient")     // Would match "review:testclient"
Conditions.like("*escaped\\*")      // Would match "example_of_escaped*"
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    like("review:*")
    like("*:testclient")
    like("*escaped\\*")

### Map

Tests specific keys in a JSON map with specified conditions.  If multiple keys are specified, all conditions must be
satisfied for the condition to be true (ie. conditions are ANDed together).  Keys not mentioned are ignored.

Java

```java
Conditions.mapBuilder().contains("type", "review").build()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    {..,"type":"review"}

Test whether a map contains the `submissionTxId` key:

Java

```java
Conditions.mapBuilder().containsKey("submissionTxId").build()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    {..,"submissionTxId":+}

Java

```java
Conditions.mapBuilder()
        .matches("photo", Conditions.mapBuilder().contains("status", "APPROVED").build())
        .build()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    {..,"photo":{..,"status":"APPROVED"}}

### And, Or

A conjunction or disjunction of multiple condition tests.

Java

```java
Conditions.and(Conditions.isDefined(), Conditions.isMap())
Conditions.or(Conditions.isList(), Conditions.isMap())
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    and(+,is(map))
    or(is(list),is(map))


There is a Java shorthand for an `or` of multiple equality tests:

Java

```java
Conditions.in("APPROVED", "REJECTED")
Conditions.or(Conditions.equal("APPROVED"), Conditions.equal("REJECTED"))
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    or("APPROVED","REJECTED")

Note that it's not usually necessary to use `and()` to test multiple keys in a map.  For example, the following Databus
subscription table filter will subscribe to events on all tables containing TestCustomer products or categories:

Delta Condition Syntax

    {..,"type":or("product","category"),"client":"TestCustomer"}


### Not

Inverts the result of a condition test.

Java

```java
Conditions.not(Conditions.equal("APPROVED"))
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    not("APPROVED")

### Constant

Always true.

Java

```java
Conditions.alwaysTrue()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    alwaysTrue()

Always false.

Java

```java
Conditions.alwaysFalse()
```

Delta Condition Syntax

    alwaysFalse()

Note that the delta condition syntax `true` and `false` correspond to `Conditions.equal(true)` and
`Conditions.equal(false)`, respectively.

Read-Modify-Write
-----------------

Fundamentally, conditional deltas plus the databus come very close to supporting a read-modify-write style of update.

1.   Read the original state of the document.
2.   Compute a new version of the document.
3.   Write a conditional delta, conditioned on the original state of the document.
4.   Either the write succeeds, or *eventually* the write conflicts with another write, the conditional write fails,
     and a databus event fires for the conflicting write.  When that happens, a databus listener can detect that the
     conditional write failed and retry the update.
{:.workflow}

Note that there may be a period of time where the conditional write appears to have succeeded because the conflicting
write (perhaps from another data center) is not yet visible.  Consider the following:

1.   Application writes a literal delta `t1`.
2.   Application in data center A writes a conditional delta `t3`.
3.   Concurrently, application in data center B writes delta `t2` that invalidates the conditional delta `t3`.
4.   For a while, readers in data center A will only see `t1` and `t3` and think that the conditional write succeeded.
5.   However, once `t2` replicates to data center A, readers will now see `t1`, `t2`, `t3` in sequence and the effect
     of evaluating `t3` will change, invalidating the conditional write.
{:.workflow}

Because of this, it can appear that the System of Record may go back and retroactively fail a conditional write.
However, the databus will guarantee to fire an event whenever this happens so apps can have a chance to detect it and
retry the write.

Compaction
----------

To make sure that reads do not get prohibitively inefficient due to high number of updates that need to be resolved
at read time, EmoDB combines together older deltas and replaces them with a single delta equal to their combined
effect, thus making the reads go faster.

However, there is a major challenge that comes with compaction in a multi-data center cluster. When is it ok to compact
deltas for a given row in a data center? Specifically, what if an older delta arrives after we are done compacting?
If we arbitrarily decide to compact deltas, say every five minutes, then we run the risk of losing deltas that may still
be in flight from a different data center.

To solve this issue, EmoDB computes the *Full Consistency Timestamp (FCT)*, which is defined as time t before which all
deltas are fully consistent on all nodes. Said another way, there will be no deltas arriving from other data centers
with timestamps before the FCT.

Any delta prior to FCT gets compacted without any fear of data loss. A special "compaction record" is created that tracks
compaction activity and ensures that intrinsics like `~version`, `~firstUpdateAt` etc. are maintained correctly.

The `DataStore.getTimeline()` method will return the set of deltas currently stored in the System of Record.  At first
glance, it may look like you can use this to see all the individual deltas that were ever written for a document.  But
remember that, eventually, old deltas will be compacted together.  So you can't rely on the System of Record to keep a
complete history of the life of a document.  Only audit records are never compacted.  If there is historical information
you must keep, you can store it in an audit record. By default, EmoDB does keep a history of the past two days of
compacted deltas. This value can be tweaked or disabled by configuring `historyTtl` property accordingly.

The compaction process is done opportunistically whenever documents are read from the System of Record.  If a document
is only written and never read, it will never be compacted.
